## REVIEW ARTICLE

## The dose-response relationship between resistance training volume and muscle hypertrophy: There are still doubts

Samuel L. Buckner, Enrique N. Moreno, Holly T. Baxter

Within the resistance training and muscle growth research space, the importance of resistance training volume is often touted as one of, if not, the single most important variable to consider when designing a resistance training intervention, especially as it pertains to resistance trained individuals.

Objectives : To examine the literature used to suggest that volume is the primary driver of skeletal muscle growth.

- Design and Methods : Non-systematic review. Research articles were collected using search terms such as resistance training OR resistance training volume. These terms were combined with AND: quadriceps muscle thickness, OR biceps muscle thickness, and other muscle-site related terms.

Results : Studies in resistance trained individuals that suggest a dose-response relationship between resistance training volume and muscle growth have observed a magnitude of muscle growth that is greater than what is typically observed. For example, it may be common to observe a 0.1-0.25 cm increase in quadriceps muscle thickness following an intervention. However, studies have observed changes as high as 0.6-0.72 cm in quadriceps muscle thickness. In addition, there are several investigations demonstrating similar growth between lower and higher volume training protocols in resistance trained individuals.

Conclusions : While resistance training volume may very well be one of the more important factors influencing the hypertrophic response in resistance trained individuals, we would suggest that the current evidence is much more ambiguous. Replication of the current findings may be necessary before strong conclusions are drawn. While some threshold of training volume is likely necessary for muscle growth, the current recommendations may exaggerate its importance.

( Journal of Trainology 2023;12:29-36)

Key words :  Muscle Growth  Resistance Training  Volume  Dose-Response; B-mode Ultrasound

## INTRODUCTION

Within the  resistance  training  (RT)  literature  it  is  very common to see documented the importance of training volume (often defined as repetitions x sets x load 1 )  emphasized with regard to skeletal muscle (SM) growth adaptations. 1-3 For example,  a  recent  publication  titled:  'Evidence-Based Guidelines  for  Resistance  Training  Volume  to  Maximize Muscle Hypertrophy' 4  made the suggestion that: 'There is compelling evidence that RT volume is a primary driver of hypertrophy, with higher volumes showing greater increases in  muscle growth'. 4   Within  these  recommendations, authors suggest that '10+ sets' per muscle group per week would be a good starting point for a hypertrophy-oriented training program. In addition, authors present a hypothetical periodized training program (Table 2 in Schoenfeld et al. 4 ) where individuals may be performing 20-25 sets per muscle group per week during a functional overreaching phase (8 weeks' time in the example). In 2016, a letter to the editor was published in the Journal of Sports Science titled: 'The dose-response relationship  between  resistance  training  volume  and  muscle

Received October 15, 2023; accepted December 5, 2023

From the USF Muscle Lab, Exercise Science Program, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA (S.L.B., E.N.M.), and Holly Baxter LLC, Fort

Lauderdale, FL, USA (H.T.B.)

Communicated by Takashi Abe, Ph.D.

Correspondence to: Dr. Samuel L. Buckner, 4202 E. Fowler Ave. PED 214, Tampa, Florida 33620-8600, USA

Email: slbuckner@usf.edu

Journal of Trainology 2023;12:29-36  ©2023 The Active Aging Research Center      http://trainology.org

hypertrophy: are there really still any doubts?'. 2 The title and contents of this manuscript perpetuate the idea that volume is the primary driver of SM growth and that the scientific community has reached a point of agreement regarding this issue. Despite this, the authors of the present manuscript would suggest  that  there  is  still  a  great  deal  of  skepticism  around  the importance of resistance training volume within the scientific community. 5-7 In particular, many of the studies cited regarding  the  importance  of  resistance  training  volume  have observed changes in muscle size that are of a magnitude not typically observed when examining other studies in the resistance training literature (i.e., a large magnitude). In addition, limitations  of  studies  that  do  not  observe  a  dose-response between muscle growth and volume are often pointed out (e.g., sample size too small, untrained subjects, study duration too short), while studies showing a clearer dose-response are not  given  the  same  scrutiny,  despite  similar  shortcomings/ limitations.  The  meta-analysis  published  in  2016  suggested that  there  exists  a  dose-response  relationship  between  resistance training volume and muscle growth. 1  However, of the two papers included in the review that were conducted in resistance  trained  individuals,  neither  intervention  demonstrated significant differences between their higher and lower volume training groups when examining changes in fat free mass 8 or changes in muscle cross-sectional area (CSA). 6  More recent papers in resistance trained individuals have demonstrated  a  more  clear  relationship  between  increased  training volume and increased muscle growth, however, the magnitude of changes observed in these studies 3,9 stands out as the growth is ~2-7x the magnitude of what is observed in other studies  across  the  resistance  training  literature.  Resistance training volume may very well be the most important factor for stimulating SM growth adaptations. However, the purpose of  the  present  manuscript  is  to  explain  why  the  current  evidence cited for the importance of training volume in resistance  trained  individuals  may  not  warrant  the  conviction expressed in position stands and expert statements.

## Study Selection

A  non-systematic  review  was  performed.  In  general, research articles  were  collected  using  search  terms  such  as resistance  training  OR  resistance  training  volume.  These terms were combined with AND: quadriceps muscle thickness, OR biceps muscle thickness, OR vastus lateralis muscle thickness OR rectus femoris muscle thickness, OR quadriceps cross-sectional area, OR vastus lateralis cross-sectional area, OR biceps cross-sectional area. Papers were also identified through references in related reviews on resistance training volume and muscle growth. 4,2,1 For the purposes of the present manuscript only studies examining resistance trained individuals  were  included  in  the  discussion.  Our  search  was  not meant to be exhaustive, but representative of the overall literature on the topic.

## Evidence Against  a  Dose-Response  Relationship Between Training Volume and Muscle Growth

Although the dose-response relationship between volume and SM growth is suggested to have compelling evidence 2  we would suggest that the data is more ambiguous than clear. For example, Heaselgrave et al. 5  examined changes in biceps brachii muscle thickness (MT) following 6-weeks of low (9 sets per week), moderate (18 sets per week) or high (27 sets per week) volume RT in 49 resistance trained males. Exercises included in  the  intervention  were  the  seated  supine  biceps curl, the supine grip bent-over row, and the supine grip pulldown.  Following  the  6-week  time  period,  authors  noted

Table 1: Training Program from Ostrowski et al. 6

| Training Day   | Exercise Performed                                                                                |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Day 1          | Squat, Leg Press, Leg Extension, Stiff-Leg Deadlift, Leg Curl, Single-Leg Curl                    |
| Day 2          | Bench Press, Incline Bench Press, Decline Bench Press, Shoulder Press, Upright Row, Lateral Raise |
| Day 3          | Lat Pulldown, T-Bar Pulldown, Seated row, Calf Raise, Calf Press, Seated Calf Raise               |
| Day 4          | Barbell Curl, Preacher Curl, Dumbbell Curl, Close Grip Bench, Triceps Pushdown, Triceps Extension |

Adapted from Ostrowski et al.  6  table 1. Low volume performed 1 set per exercise, moderate volume performed 2 sets per exercise, high volume performed 4 sets per exercise.   .

changes in MT in the magnitude of 0.1 cm, 0.3 cm, and 0.2 cm for the low, moderate, and high volume groups, respectively, with no significant differences noted between groups. 5 Similar to this, Ostrowski et al. 6  examined changes in muscle size  of  the  rectus  femoris  and  triceps  brachia  (via  B-mode ultrasound) in response to 10 weeks of low (3 sets per muscle group per week), moderate (6 sets per muscle group per week) or high (12 sets per muscle group per week) RT volume in 27 resistance trained men. The training program is provided in Table 1. Following the intervention, authors observed changes in triceps brachia MT of 0.1 cm, 0.2 cm, and 0.2 cm for their low, moderate, and high volume training groups, respectively, with no statistically significant differences between groups. 6 For the rectus femoris, authors observed changes of 63 mm 2 , 47 mm 2 , and 113 mm 2  for their low, moderate, and high volume training groups, respectively, with no statistically significant differences between groups. 6 Thus, this study provided evidence that performing higher amounts of weekly volume did not bring about any additional advantages/benefits when compared to lower and moderate volume approaches.

Amirthalingam et al. 7   examined  upper  and  lower  body changes in MT following a low volume (5 sets of 10 repetitions  for  the  major  lifts)  versus  a  relatively  higher  volume training program (10 sets of 10 repetitions for the major lifts) in  a  group  of  resistance  trained  men.  The  complete  training program is provided in Table 2. For quadriceps work, participants completed a total of 24 weekly sets (10 sets of leg press, 10 sets of dumbbell lunges and 4 sets of leg extensions), compared to the lower volume group which completed 14 weekly sets  of  quadriceps  work  (total  quadriceps  volume  may  be debated  depending  on  lounge  and  leg  press  technique). Following the intervention, authors observed no significant increases in muscle mass as measured by B-mode ultrasound in  either  group  at  any  of  the  muscle  sites  imaged.  When examining the  anterior  thigh,  there  were  non-significant increases of 0.26 cm and 0.11 cm in the low and high volume groups, respectively.  Together  these  studies 5,6,7 and  others 14 provide evidence that there is a lack of a dose-response relationship  between resistance training volume and growth in resistance trained individuals.

## Evidence for a Dose-Response Relationship Between Resistance Training Volume and Growth

Despite there being research demonstrating no differences in SM growth between low, moderate, and high volume training programs, other studies have found what appears to be a Adapted from Amirthalingam et al. 7  table 1. 1RM = One repetition maximum; RM = Repetition maximum clearer  dose-response  relationship.  For  example,  one  of  the most cited papers 3   suggesting  a  dose-response  relationship between exercise volume and changes in MT reported a 0.29 cm, 0.46 cm, and a 0.72 cm increase in lateral thigh MT in their low volume, moderate volume, and high volume groups, respectively,  following  8-weeks of full body RT (performed 3x weekly). Participants in this study were resistance trained, and the program included the following exercises: flat barbell bench press,  barbell  military  press,  wide  grip  lateral  pull down, seated  cable  row,  barbell  back  squat,  machine  leg press,  and  unilateral  machine  leg  extension. 3 Muscle  thickness  was  measured via B-mode ultrasound, with measures taken at 50% the distance between the lateral condyle of the femur and greater trochanter for the rectus femoris and vastus lateralis  muscles.  When quantifying volume as total weekly sets authors noted that there were 6, 18 or 30 upper body sets for the low, moderate, and high volume groups, respectively. For the lower body there were 9, 27 or 45 weekly sets for the low, moderate and high volume groups respectively. 3  Overall, the authors suggest a dose-response relationship between volume and SM growth in their conclusions. 3  However, when examining the results, there were no significant difference between groups for changes in triceps MT. 3  In addition, there were no statistical differences between the moderate volume and high volume groups for elbow flexor MT (BF10 = 0.60). 3 When examining changes in the mid-thigh and lateral thigh, there weak evidence in favor of high volume versus moderate volume groups (BF10 = 2.34 and 2.25 for the mid-thigh and lateral  thigh  respectively). 3 Nevertheless, what is most interesting about the findings is the large magnitude of SM growth observed. Specifically, 0.72 cm of SM growth in the high volume group for the lateral thigh over an 8-week time frame is much greater than what is typically observed in the RT literature. This is not limited to MT of the leg, as mid-thigh MT in the  high  volume  group  also  observed  unusually  robust  SM growth (0.68 cm). 3

Table 2 : Training Program from Amirthalingam et al. 7

| Session 1           | Session 1   | Session 1          | Session 2     | Session 2    | Session 2          | Session 3          | Session 3    | Session 3          |
|---------------------|-------------|--------------------|---------------|--------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------|--------------------|
| Exercise            | Load (%1RM) | Sets x Repetitions | Exercise      | Load (% 1RM) | Sets x Repetitions | Exercise           | Load (% 1RM) | Sets x Repetitions |
| Flat bench press    | 60% 1RM     | 10 or 5x10         | Leg Press     | 80% 1RM      | 10 or 5x10         | Shoulder press     | 60% 1RM      | 10 or 5 x 10       |
| Latt pull-down      | 60% 1RM     | 10 or 5x10         | DB Lunge      | 70% 1RM      | 10 or 5x10         | Upright row        | 60% 1RM      | 10 or 5 x 10       |
| Incline bench press | 70% 1RM     | 4 x10              | Leg extension | 70% 1RM      | 4x10               | Tricep push downs  | 70% 1RM      | 4 x 10             |
| Seated row          | 70% 1RM     | 4x10               | Leg curl      | 70% 1RM      | 4x10               | Bicep curls        | 60% 1RM      | 4 x 10             |
| Crunches            | Close toRM  | 3x20               | Calf raisers  | Close toRM   | 3x20               | Sit-ups with twist | Close toRM   | 3x20               |

To  provide  a  point  of  reference,  Aube  et  al. 14   examined muscle growth in resistance trained men following 8-weeks of lower body exercise (i.e.,  barbell  back  squat  and  leg  press exercises) when performing either 12-, 18-, or 24-weekly sets to  or  near  muscular  failure.  Authors  observed  no  statistical differences amongst their different volumes of training following the intervention period. Of note, authors observed an increase of 0.15 cm at 50% the distance of the anterior thigh in the 24 weekly set group. 14 In  the  Schoenfeld investigation the  mid-thigh  measurement increased by 0.68 cm in the 45 weekly set condition. Such large differences between studies stand out, particularly when it is considered that Schoenfeld et al. 3 observed  a  magnitude  of  growth  that  was  4.5x  that observed by Aube et al. 14 . The impressiveness of such a large change  in  MT  will  be  discussed  in  subsequent  sections. However, Table 3 provides magnitudes of muscle growth across  several  studies  in  the  resistance  training  literature. Herein,  the  reader  can  observe  that  muscle  growth  rarely exceeds 0.4 cm.

## Volume Indirectly Through Rest Periods

The importance of RT literature volume is further highlighted in a previous investigation 9 that  examined long- versus  short-interset  rest  intervals  on  SM  growth  in  resistance trained  individuals.  Authors  employed an 8-week full-body RT program (performed 3x week) wherein individuals performed 3 sets of an 8-12 RM per exercise (27 weekly sets) and each group was allotted either 3 mins of rest (i.e., LONG) or 1 min of rest (i.e., SHORT) between sets. 9 These authors 9  measured  MT via B-mode ultrasound at various muscle sites, namely the anterior thigh, vastus lateralis, elbow flexors, and triceps  brachii.  Following  the  training  period,  authors observed significantly greater increases in anterior thigh MT (p  =  0.04)  in  favor  of  the  LONG  group.  Additionally,  the LONG group experienced significant increases in triceps brachii MT pre-to-post-intervention, while the SHORT group did not observe significant increases. 9 It is interesting to note that for  the  anterior  thigh,  the  LONG  group  (+0.71  cm;  +13.3%) experienced nearly double the increase in MT than that of the SHORT group (+0.36 cm; +6.9%). 2  This is a similar magnitude of growth as observed in the 45 weekly set group of the volume investigation previously discussed 3  and is outside of what is typically seen in the literature. Similarly, the changes in triceps brachii MT were several times greater in the LONG group (+0.29 cm; +7%) when compared to the SHORT group (+0.02 cm; +0.5%). Authors speculated that such differences in muscle growth were driven by the higher total volume load performed  by  the  LONG  group  over  the  8-week  period. However, it is worth noting that there were no statistically significant  differences  in  volume  of  work  performed,  nor  were there significant correlations between total load volume and changes in the various measurements. The authors suggest that  the  beneficial  effects  of  longer  rest  intervals  may  be mediated by a higher volume load, but ultimately concede that Figure 1

Figure 1 provides an illustration of A) Measurement site for muscle thickness (MT) of the anterior thigh; B) How MT is measured on the anterior thigh C) Example of a MT image taken using B-mode ultrasound and D) Illustration of typical (0.2 cm) and large (0.7 cm) magnitudes of Figure 1 provides an illustration of A) Measurement site for muscle thickness (MT) of the anterior thigh; B) How MT is measured on the anterior thigh C) Example of a MT image taken using B-mode ultrasound and D) Illustration of typical (0.2 cm) and large (0.7 cm) magnitudes of muscle growth (not to scale)

<!-- image -->

muscle growth (not to scale)

the study was underpowered to make this determination. This study,  along  with  the  others  have  resulted  in  recommendations in a recent position stand, where it is suggested that longer rest periods may be more beneficial for SM hypertrophy, presumably through the greater volume load compared with shorter rest periods. 13

## Is this Amount of Growth Possible?

If  performing  higher  amounts  of  training  volume  were indeed to play this dramatic of a role in promoting muscle growth, it begs the question as to why other studies conducted outside of this research group have not observed such differences in muscle size between groups. For example, the previously mentioned investigation by Aube et al. 14 found no statistical differences for muscle growth in resistance trained men after 8-weeks of lower body exercise when performing either 12-,  18-,  or  24-weekly  sets  to  or  near  volitional  fatigue. Pertaining changes in anterior thigh MT, authors observed the highest  responses  in  the  12-weekly  set  group  (+0.38  cm; +6.4%), whereas the 24-weekly set group observed the lowest responses (+0.15 cm; +2.7%), despite performing double the amount of exercise sets. 14  When one looks from both an absolute  and  relative  perspective,  the  changes  in  the  highest response group in this study (+0.38 cm; +6.4%) 14  were on par with the lowest response group (+0.36 cm; +6.9%) observed in the previously mentioned study for anterior thigh MT and nearly half of the highest response group (+0.71 cm; +13.3%), 9 which is quite surprising. Providing another example, referring back to the Amirthalingam et al. 15 investigation, authors found no statistical differences in anterior thigh MT following 6  weeks of either 5- or 10-sets per lower body exercise per visit (i.e., leg press and dumbbell lunge) in resistance trained men (14 or 24 weekly sets). Despite the 10-set per session group performing double the training volume, the magnitude of  muscle growth observed was higher in the lower volume group (+0.26 cm; +4.7%). 15  Again, these changes in MT are significantly  less  in  magnitude  (both  absolute  and  relative) compared to the previously mentioned studies in similar muscle groups, populations, and with similar study durations. 9,3,16

When trying to interpret key papers 3,9,2   highlighting  the importance of RT volume, it is interesting to consider if certain  magnitudes of growth are possible over the time frame observed. Using the Schoenfeld investigations 3,9   with  lower body MT data as an example, there are only two other studies (that we are aware of) that have observed muscle growth of a similar magnitude. 17,18 The first study was by Barbalho et al. 18 whom observed increases of 0.66 cm and 0.8 cm for the quadriceps femoris in their groups that performed either 5 or 10 sets  per  session,  respectively.  For  reasons  which  are  outside the  purpose of this  present  manuscript,  this  paper  has  been retracted and will not be discussed further. A 2014 investigation 17 examined  the  effects  of  12-weeks  of  periodized  RT combined with either beta-Hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate-free acid (HMB-FA) supplementation or a placebo on changes in muscle size.  Amongst  other  outcomes,  authors  examined changes in lean body mass (measured via dual X-ray absorptiometry) and quadriceps femoris MT measured via B-mode ultrasound (determined as the combined MT of the vastus lateralis and vastus intermedius). 17 After the 12-week training period, authors observed a 7.4 kg increase in lean body mass and an increase in MT from 50.2 mm to 57.4 mm (a mean change of 7.2 mm or 0.72 cm). Within the scientific community,  this  data  has  been  criticized,  with  some  authors  pointing out that the change observed in lean body mass is greater than what some studies have found following anabolic steroid usage. We would also suggest that the change in MT observed by Wilson et al. 17 is  unusually high and warrants discussion. Considering that these recent studies 3,9   have found comparable muscle growth in their higher volume groups, we suggest that  replication  of  these  studies  is  necessary  before  strong conclusions can be drawn in resistance trained individuals regarding the relationship  between  RT  volume  and  muscle growth.

In  an  attempt  to  provide  further  perspective,  lower  body muscle growth measured across several RT studies are provided in Table 3. All of the provided studies were conducted in resistance trained individuals. For example, it can be seen that  Amirthalingam et al. 15 observed  changes  in  MT  of  the anterior thigh in the magnitude of 0.26 and 0.11 for their 5and 10-sets (14 or 24 weekly sets) groups, respectively. The reader can look across several different studies from different labs and note the slight differences in muscle growth across various time frames (4 weeks - 24 weeks). However, muscle growth rarely appears to exceed 0.4 cm over an 8-12-week duration. In addition, the reader may observe that the average change across  all  studies  is  around  0.28  cm.  The  studies included in this table were not necessarily designed to examine the influence of training volume on muscle growth adaptations. Instead, these studies are included to better familiarize  the  reader  with  common  MT changes that are observed following resistance training interventions. This will allow the  reader  to  further  evaluate  the  available  data  and  ponder possibilities  much  like  ourselves.  While  no  data  should  be dismissed or discredited, it may result in putting less weight in certain studies until replication of the results is performed. Figure 1 is provided in order to help the reader visualize what MT may look like, how MT is measured, and what magnitudes of change look like side-by-side.

## Possible Explanations

It is possible that such dissimilarities in muscle growth may very  well  be  explained  by  methodological  differences between lab groups. It is important to consider that often nonexercise control groups are missing from interventions. This may be crucial to understanding the error of measurements when imaging muscle sites several weeks apart and may better aid in contextualizing the magnitudes of growth observed. Additionally, it is conceivable that different training in ultrasound methods or interface selection when analyzing ultrasound images may explain some of the differences between studies.  Another possibility is that excess swelling resulting from high volume protocols may be mis-interpreted for muscle growth. Although swelling does not appear to accumulate across a training week 19 and  is  suggested  to  dissipate  48-72 hours following a training bout, 20 it  does  seem  possible  that heightened swelling may be present with high volume training.  For  example,  the  study  cited  by  Schoenfeld  et  al. 3 for their suggestion that acute increases in MT return to baseline within 48 h after an RT session is a paper that cites pilot data (data  not  presented)  to  suggest  that  acute  muscle  swelling from bench press exercise returns to baseline within 24 hours. Furthermore, the protocol used in the paper referenced had participants  perform  3  sets  of  10  repetitions  on  the  bench press exercise 3 days per week (9 sets per week total), 21  which is considerably less that what was employed in the Schoenfeld investigation. 3 In addition, Buckner et al. 19  demonstrated that swelling may be minimal in the days following an exercise bout.  However,  authors  had  individuals  perform  an  acute exercise bout consisting of 4 sets of biceps curls at 70% of participants 1RM. 19  When training with higher volumes, perhaps additional days (e.g.,  96-120  hours)  between  the  final training session and post-testing are necessary to allow swelling and inflammation to decrease. Finally, it is possible that the highlighted papers on volume 3,9   were simply more effective  for  growth  and  perhaps  other  studies  are  under-dosing participants. This may be attributed to the additional volume, the  experience  and  effectiveness  of  the  training  staff,  or  a combination of both these factors.

## CONCLUSION

While RT volume may very well be one of the more important  factors  influencing  the  hypertrophic  response  in  resistance trained individuals, we would suggest that the current evidence is much more ambiguous than clear. Indeed, recent work has demonstrated that groups that train with higher volumes experience a greater magnitude of growth compared to groups training with lower volumes. 3,9,16  However, these studies appear to observe magnitudes of growth that may be outside of what is expected over the time frame examined. Even if  volume  does  contribute  to  additional  muscle  growth  with additional exercise sets, it is unlikely (in our opinion) that an increase in the magnitude of 0.7cm at the group level is possible over 8-weeks' time as depicted by Schoenfeld et al. 3  For these reasons, replication of these findings may be necessary before  strong  conclusions  are  drawn.  If  these  studies  are interpreted with caution, there appears to be much less compelling evidence that there is a dose-response between resistance  training  volume  and  muscle  growth  in  resistance trained  individuals.  In  fact,  there  are  several  investigations demonstrating similar growth between lower and higher volume training protocols in resistance trained  individuals. 5-7 While there appears to be some threshold of volume that is necessary for muscle growth, the current recommendations may exaggerate its importance. It is our hope that this paper stimulates positive inquiry around in the area of RT volume and muscle growth.

## CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

SLB and ENM declare that they have no conflicts of interest  that  are  relevant  to  the  content  of  this  article.  HTB  is owner of a nutrition and training education company.

## REFERENCES

1.  Schoenfeld  BJ,  Ogborn  D,  Krieger  JW.  Dose-response  relationship between weekly resistance training volume and increases in muscle mass: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Sports Sci 2017; 35: 1073-1082.
2.  Schoenfeld BJ, Ogborn D, Krieger JW. The dose-response relationship between resistance training  volume  and  muscle  hypertrophy:  are  there really still any doubts? J Sports Sci 2017; 35: 1985-1987.
3.  Schoenfeld BJ, Contreras B, Krieger J et al. Resistance training volume enhances muscle hypertrophy but not strength in trained men. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2019;51;1:94.
4.  Schoenfeld B, Grgic J. Evidence-based guidelines for resistance training volume to maximize muscle hypertrophy. Strength Cond J 2018; 40: 107112.
5.  Heaselgrave SR, Blacker J, Smeuninx B et al. Dose-response relationship

of  weekly  resistance-training  volume  and  frequency  on  muscular adaptations in trained men. Int  J  Sports  Physiol  Perform 2019;  14:  360368.

6.  Ostrowski KJ, Wilson GJ, Weatherby R et al. The effect of weight training volume on hormonal output and muscular size and function. J  Strength Cond Res 1997; 11: 148-154.
7.  Amirthalingam T,  Mavros Y, Wilson  GC  et  al.  Effects  of  a  Modified German Volume Training Program on Muscular Hypertrophy and Strength. J Strength Cond Res 2017; 31: 3109-3119.
8.  Rhea MR, Alvar BA, Ball SD et al. Three sets of weight training superior to  1  set  with  equal  intensity  for  eliciting  strength. J  Strength  Cond  Res 2002; 16: 525-529.
9.  Schoenfeld  BJ,  Pope  ZK,  Benik  FM  et  al.  Longer  interset  rest  periods enhance muscle strength and hypertrophy in resistance-trained men. J Strength Cond Res 2016; 30: 1805-1812.
10.  Jakubowski JS, Wong EP, Nunes EA et al. Equivalent hypertrophy and strength gains in β-Hydroxy-β-Methylbutyrate-or Leucine-supplemented men. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2019; 51: 65-74.
11.  Kraemer  WJ,  Hatfield  DL,  Volek  JS  et  al.  Effects  of  amino  acids supplement on physiological adaptations to resistance training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009; 41: 1111-1121.
12.  Jessee M, Buckner S, Mouser JG et al. Muscle adaptations to high-load training  and  very  low-load  training  with  and  without  blood  flow restriction. Front Physiol 2018; 9: 1448.
13.  Schoenfeld B, Fisher J, Grgic J et al. Resistance training recommendations to maximize muscle hypertrophy in an athletic population: Position stand of the IUSCA. Int J Strength Cond 2021; 1: 1.
14.  Aube D, Wadhi T, Rauch J et al. Progressive resistance training volume: Effects on muscle thickness, mass, and strength adaptations in resistancetrained individuals. J Strength Cond Res 2022; 36: 600-607.
15.  Amirthalingam T, Mavros Y, Wilson GC et al. Effects of a modified German volume training program on muscular hypertrophy and strength. J Strength Cond Res 2017; 31: 3109-3119.
16.  Longo AR, Silva-Batista C, Pedroso K et al. Volume load rather than resting  interval  influences  muscle  hypertrophy  during  high-intensity resistance training. J Strength Cond Res 2022; 36: 1554-1559.
17.  Wilson JM, Lowery RP, Joy JM et al. The effects of 12 weeks of betahydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate free acid supplementation on muscle mass, strength,  and  power  in  resistance-trained  individuals:  a  randomized, double-blind,  placebo-controlled  study. Eur J Appl Physiol 2014;  114: 1217-1227.
18.  Barbalho M, Coswig V, Steele J et al. Evidence for an upper threshold for resistance training volume in trained women. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2019; 51: 515-522.
19.  Buckner SL, Dankel SJ, Mattocks KT et al. Differentiating swelling and hypertrophy through indirect assessment of muscle damage in untrained men following repeated bouts of resistance exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 2017; 117: 213-224.
20.  Damas F, Phillips  SM,  Libardi  CA  et  al.  Resistance  training-induced changes  in  integrated  myofibrillar  protein  synthesis  are  related  to

hypertrophy only after attenuation of muscle damage. J Physiol 2016; 594: 5209-5222.

21.  Ogasawara R, Thiebaud RS, Loenneke JP et al. Time course for arm and chest muscle thickness changes following bench press training. Interv Med Appl Sci 2012; 4: 217-220.
22.  Baz-Valle E, Schoenfeld BJ, Torres-Unda J et al. The effects of exercise variation  in  muscle  thickness,  maximal  strength  and  motivation  in resistance trained men. PloS One 2019; 14: e0226989.
23.  Brigatto  FA,  Lima  LEdM, Germano MD et al. High resistance-training volume enhances muscle thickness in resistance-trained men. J  Strength Cond Res 2022; 36: 22-30.
24.  Brigatto  FA,  Braz TV,  da  Costa  Zanini TC  et  al.  Effect  of  resistance training frequency on neuromuscular performance and muscle morphology after 8 weeks in trained men. J Strength Cond Res 2019; 33: 2104-2116.
25.  Costa BDdV, Kassiano W, Nunes JP et al. Does Performing Different Resistance  Exercises  for  the  Same  Muscle  Group  Induce  Nonhomogeneous Hypertrophy? Int J Sports Med 2021; 42: 803-811.
26.  Ema R, Saito I, Akagi R. Neuromuscular adaptations induced by adjacent joint training. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2018; 28: 947-960.
27.  Gonzalez AM, Sell KM, Ghigiarelli JJ et al. Effects of phosphatidic acid supplementation on muscle thickness and strength in resistance-trained men. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 2017; 42: 443-448.
28.  Joy JM, Lowery RP, Wilson JM et al. The effects of 8 weeks of whey or rice  protein  supplementation  on  body  composition  and  exercise performance. Nutr J 2013; 12: 1-7.
29.  Lasevicius T, Schoenfeld BJ, Grgic J et al. Similar muscular adaptations in resistance  training  performed  two  versus  three  days  per  week. J  Human Kinetics 2019; 68: 135.
30.  Mangine GT, Hoffman JR, Gonzalez AM et al. The effect of training volume and intensity on improvements in muscular strength and size in resistance-trained men. Physiol Rep 2015; 3: e12472.
31.  Melville  GW,  Siegler  JC,  Marshall  PW. The  effects  of  d-aspartic  acid supplementation in resistance-trained  men  over  a  three  month  training period: A randomised controlled trial. PLoS One 2017; 12: e0182630.
32.  Pearson J, Wadhi T, Barakat C et al. Does varying repetition tempo in a single-joint  lower  body  exercise  augment  muscle  size  and  strength  in resistance-trained men? J Strength Cond Res 2022; 36: 2162-2168.
33.  Schoenfeld BJ, Grgic J, Contreras B et al. To flex or rest: does adding no-load isometric actions to the inter-set rest period in resistance training enhance  muscular  adaptations? A  randomized-controlled  trial. Front Physiol 2020; 10: 1571.
34.  Schoenfeld BJ, Peterson MD, Ogborn D et al. Effects of low-vs. high-load resistance  training  on  muscle  strength  and  hypertrophy  in  well-trained men. J Strength Cond Res 2015; 29: 2954-2963.
35.  Schwanbeck SR, Cornish SM, Barss T et al. Effects of training with free weights versus machines on muscle mass, strength, free testosterone, and free cortisol levels. J Strength Cond Res 2020; 34: 1851-1859.
36.  Zaroni  RS,  Brigatto  FA,  Schoenfeld  BJ  et  al.  High  resistance-training frequency enhances muscle thickness in resistance-trained men. J Strength Cond Res 2019; 33: S140-S151.

Table 3 : Changes in Muscle Thickness in The Lower Body of Resistance Trained Individuals

| Reference/Condition        |   Study Sample (included in analysis) | Sample Size Per Condition (if specified)   | Muscle Site Measured (% if provided)   |   # Of Weeks | Weekly Sets for Quads   | Pre MTH(SD) cm   | Post MTH(SD) cm   |   Change in cm |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------|-------------------------|------------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Amirthalingam (10-sets) 15 |                                    19 | n = 10                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   |            6 | 24 sets                 | 5.33 (0.78)      | 5.44 (0.72)       |           0.11 |
| Amirthalingam (5-sets) 15  |                                    19 | n = 9                                      | Anterior thigh (50%)                   |            6 | 14 sets                 | 5.31 (0.92)      | 5.57 (0.97)       |           0.26 |
| Aube (12-sets) 14          |                                    35 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   |            8 | 12 sets                 | 5.8 (1.0)        | 6.2 (1.0)         |           0.38 |
| Aube (12-sets) 14          |                                    35 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (75%)                   |            8 | 12 sets                 | 3.4 (0.9)        | 3.8 (1.0)         |           0.34 |
| Aube (18-sets) 14          |                                    35 | n = 12                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   |            8 | 18 sets                 | 5.7 (0.9)        | 6.0 (0.7)         |           0.32 |
| Aube (18-sets) 14          |                                    35 | n = 12                                     | Anterior thigh (75%)                   |            8 | 18 sets                 | 3.1 (0.9)        | 3.4 (0.9)         |           0.28 |

| Reference/Condition                                                                  | Study Sample (included in analysis)   | Sample Size Per Condition (if specified)   | Muscle Site Measured (% if provided)                                                                         | # Of Weeks   | Weekly Sets for Quads                     | Pre MTH(SD) cm                                            | Post MTH(SD) cm                                            | Change in cm             |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| Aube (24-sets) 14                                                                    | 35                                    | n = 10                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                                                                                         | 8            | 24 sets                                   | 5.9 (0.7)                                                 | 6.0 (0.7)                                                  | 0.15                     |
| Aube (24-sets) 14                                                                    | 35                                    | n = 10                                     | Anterior thigh (75%)                                                                                         | 8            | 24 sets                                   | 3.0 (0.7)                                                 | 3.4 (0.4)                                                  | 0.39                     |
| Barbalho (G5) 18                                                                     | 40                                    | n = 10                                     | Quadriceps femoris (50%)                                                                                     | 24           | 5 sets                                    | 5.76 (0.42)                                               | 6.42 (0.48)                                                | 0.66                     |
| Barbalho (G10) 18                                                                    | 40                                    | n = 10                                     | Quadriceps femoris (50%)                                                                                     | 24           | 10 sets                                   | 5.92 (0.34)                                               | 6.72 (0.43)                                                | 0.8                      |
| Barbalho (G15) 18                                                                    | 40                                    | n = 10                                     | Quadriceps femoris (50%)                                                                                     | 24           | 15 sets                                   | 5.91 (0.43)                                               | 6.26 (0.47)                                                | 0.35                     |
| Barbalho (G20) 18                                                                    | 40                                    | n = 10                                     | Quadriceps femoris (50%)                                                                                     | 24           | 20 sets                                   | 5.7 (0.52)                                                | 5.88 (0.54)                                                | 0.18                     |
| Baz-Valle (EXP) 22                                                                   | 22                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 18 sets                                   | 1.54 (0.31)                                               | 1.69 (0.24)                                                | 0.15                     |
| Baz-Valle (EXP) 22                                                                   | 22                                    | n = 9                                      | Rectus femoris (50%)                                                                                         | 8            | 18 sets                                   | 1.54 (0.42)                                               | 1.62 (0.31)                                                | 0.08                     |
| Baz-Valle (EXP) 22                                                                   | 22                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus intermedius (50%)                                                                                     | 8            | 18 sets                                   | 1.76 (0.43)                                               | 1.9 (0.4)                                                  | 0.14                     |
| Baz-Valle (CON) 22                                                                   | 22                                    | n = 10                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 18 sets                                   | 1.57 (0.26)                                               | 1.72 (0.35)                                                | 0.15                     |
| Baz-Valle (CON) 22                                                                   | 22                                    | n = 10                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                                                                                         | 8            | 18 sets                                   | 1.49 (0.3)                                                | 1.67 (0.28)                                                | 0.18                     |
| Baz-Valle (CON) 22                                                                   | 22                                    | n = 10                                     | Vastus intermedius (50%)                                                                                     | 8            | 18 sets                                   | 1.84 (0.44)                                               | 2.03 (0.33)                                                | 0.19                     |
| Brigatto (G16) 23                                                                    | 27                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 16 sets                                   | 3.62 (0.44)                                               | 3.69 (0.4)                                                 | 0.07                     |
| Brigatto (G24) 23                                                                    | 27                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 24 sets                                   | 3.54 (0.5)                                                | 3.74 (0.46)                                                | 0.2                      |
| Brigatto (G32) 23                                                                    | 27                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 32 sets                                   | 3.71 (0.51)                                               | 4.06 (0.51)                                                | 0.35                     |
| Brigatto (G1) 24                                                                     | 20                                    | n = 10                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            |                                           | 4.61 (0.48)                                               | 5.08 (0.45)                                                | 0.47                     |
| Brigatto (G1) 24                                                                     | 20                                    | n = 10                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                                                                                         | 8            | 16 sets                                   | 4.13 (0.39)                                               | 4.55 (0.44)                                                | 0.42                     |
| Brigatto (G2) 24                                                                     | 20                                    | n = 10                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            |                                           | 4.63 (0.55)                                               | 5.12 (0.49)                                                | 0.49                     |
| Brigatto (G2) 27 Gonzalez (PA) 27 Gonzalez (PL) 27 Gonzalez (PA) 27 Gonzalez (PL) 27 | 20 15 15 15 15                        | n = 10                                     | Anterior thigh (50%) Rectus femoris (50%) Rectus femoris (50%) Vastus Lateralis (50%) Vastus Lateralis (50%) | 8 8 8 8 8    |                                           | 3.92 (0.35) 2.63 (0.29) 2.43 (0.33) 2.1 (0.55) 1.8 (0.17) | 4.4 (0.37) 2.72 (0.36) 2.57 (0.32) 2.61 (0.83) 2.02 (0.35) | 0.48 0.09 0.09 0.51 0.22 |
| Jakubowski (Whey+HMB) 10                                                             | 26                                    | n = 13                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 12           | 8 sets Phase 1: 13 sets Phase 2: 12 sets  | 0.31 (0.2)                                                | 0.32 (0.2)                                                 | 0.1                      |
| Jakubowski (Whey+leu) 10                                                             | 26                                    | n = 13                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 12           | 8 sets Phase 1: 13 sets Phase 2: 12 sets  | 0.3 (0.3)                                                 | 0.32 (0.4)                                                 | 0.2                      |
| Joy (Rice protein) 28                                                                | 24                                    | n = 12                                     | Quadriceps femoris                                                                                           | 8            | Phase 3: 8-13 sets                        | 5 (0.4)                                                   | 5.2 (0.5)                                                  | 0.2                      |
| Joy (Whey protein) 28                                                                | 24                                    | n = 12                                     | Quadriceps femoris                                                                                           | 8            | Weekly sets is unclear                    | 4.8 (0.7)                                                 | 5.1 (0.5)                                                  | 0.3                      |
| Lasevicius (TOTAL) 29                                                                | 28                                    | n = 14                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                                                                                         | 10           | 36 sets                                   | 2.27 (0.25)                                               | 2.45 (0.27)                                                | 0.18                     |
| Lasevicius (TOTAL) 29                                                                | 28                                    | n = 14                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 10           |                                           | 2.12 (0.34)                                               | 2.38 (0.39)                                                | 0.26                     |
| Lasevicius (SPLIT) 29                                                                | 28                                    | n = 14                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                                                                                         | 10           |                                           | 2.27 (0.26)                                               | 2.55 (0.22)                                                | 0.28                     |
| Lasevicius (SPLIT) 29                                                                | 28                                    | n = 14                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 10           |                                           | 2.13 (0.29)                                               | 2.49 (0.31)                                                | 0.36                     |
| Mangine (VOL) 30                                                                     | 29                                    | n = 14                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                                                                                         | 8            |                                           | 2.7 (n/a)                                                 | 2.8 (0.3)                                                  | 0.1                      |
| Mangine (VOL) 30                                                                     | 29                                    | n = 14                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 16 sets                                   | 1.8 (n/a)                                                 | 1.9 (0.3)                                                  | 0.1                      |
| Mangine (INT) 30                                                                     | 29                                    | n = 15                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                                                                                         | 8            |                                           | 2.7 (n/a)                                                 | 2.6 (0.4)                                                  | -0.1                     |
| Mangine (INT) 30                                                                     | 29                                    | n = 15                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 8            | 12 sets Weeks 1-6: 16 sets Weeks 7-12: 20 | 1.8 (n/a)                                                 | 1.9 (0.2)                                                  | 0.1                      |
| Melville (placebo) 31                                                                | 19                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (33%)                                                                                       | 12           | 12 sets Weeks 1-6: 16 sets Weeks 7-12: 20 | 2.75 (0.37)                                               | 2.83 (0.4)                                                 | 0.08                     |
| Melville (placebo) 31                                                                | 19                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus intermedius (33%)                                                                                     | 12           | sets                                      | 1.72 (0.34)                                               | 1.84 (0.33)                                                | 0.12                     |
| Melville (placebo) 31                                                                | 19                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                                                                                       | 12           |                                           | 2.58 (0.36)                                               | 2.66 (0.46)                                                | 0.08                     |
|                                                                                      |                                       |                                            |                                                                                                              |              | 8 sets                                    |                                                           |                                                            |                          |
| Melville (placebo) 31                                                                | 19                                    | n = 9                                      | Vastus intermedius (50%)                                                                                     | 12           |                                           | 1.72 (0.34)                                               | 1.84 (0.33)                                                | 0.12                     |
| Melville (DAA) 31                                                                    | 19                                    | n = 10                                     | Vastus lateralis (33%)                                                                                       | 12           |                                           | 2.64 (0.41)                                               | 2.77 (0.48)                                                | 0.13                     |
| Melville (DAA) 31                                                                    | 19                                    | n = 10                                     | Vastus intermedius (33%)                                                                                     | 12           |                                           | 1.91 (0.4)                                                | 1.98 (0.34)                                                | 0.07                     |

| Reference/Condition          |   Study Sample (included in analysis) | Sample Size Per Condition (if specified)   | Muscle Site Measured (% if provided)   | # Of Weeks   | Weekly Sets for Quads                                                                                                                                                   | Pre MTH(SD) cm   | Post MTH(SD) cm   |   Change in cm |
|------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Melville (DAA) 31            |                                    19 | n = 10                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 12           | Phase 1: 13 sets Phase 2: 12 sets                                                                                                                                       | 2.6 (0.47)       | 2.71 (0.46)       |           0.11 |
| Melville (DAA) 31            |                                    19 | n = 10                                     | Vastus intermedius (50%)               | 12           | Phase 3: 8-13 sets                                                                                                                                                      | 2.01 (0.46)      | 2.05 (0.46)       |           0.04 |
| Pearson (FAST) 32            |                                    13 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (40%)                   | 8            | Weeks 1-4: 6 sets Weeks 5-8: 8 sets Participants were allowed to continue normal training outside of study and this in- cluded additional bilateral lower body exercise | 6.6 (0.9)        | 6.9 (0.9)         |            0.3 |
| Pearson (FAST) 32            |                                    13 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (60%)                   | 8            | 36 sets 9 sets                                                                                                                                                          | 5.2 (0.9)        | 5.5 (0.9)         |            0.3 |
| Pearson (SLOW) 32            |                                    13 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (40%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 6.7 (0.9)        | 6.9 (0.9)         |            0.2 |
| Pearson (SLOW) 32            |                                    13 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (60%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.5 (0.9)        | 5.6 (1.0)         |            0.1 |
| Schoenfeld (1 set) 3         |                                    34 | n = 11                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.97 (0.67)      | 6.17 (0.55)       |            0.2 |
| Schoenfeld (1 set) 3         |                                    34 | n = 11                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.75 (0.6)       | 6.04 (0.63)       |           0.29 |
| Schoenfeld (3 set) 3         |                                    34 | n = 12                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.79 (0.81)      | 6.1 (0.87)        |           0.31 |
| Schoenfeld (3 set) 3         |                                    34 | n = 12                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 8            | 27 sets 45 sets                                                                                                                                                         | 5.79 (0.8)       | 6.25 (0.7)        |           0.46 |
| Schoenfeld (5 set) 3         |                                    34 | n = 11                                     | Rectus femoris (50%)                   | 8            | 27 sets 45 sets                                                                                                                                                         | 5.44 (0.34)      | 6.12 (0.45)       |           0.68 |
| Schoenfeld (5 set) 3         |                                    34 | n = 11                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 8            | 27 sets 45 sets                                                                                                                                                         | 5.24 (0.62)      | 5.96 (0.58)       |           0.72 |
| Schoenfeld (TRAD) 33         |                                    27 | n = 13                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   | 8            | 18 sets 27 sets                                                                                                                                                         | 5.8 (1.1)        | 6.1 (0.9)         |           0.28 |
| Schoenfeld (TRAD) 33         |                                    27 | n = 13                                     | Lateral thigh (50%)                    | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.5 (0.9)        | 6.0 (0.8)         |           0.45 |
| Schoenfeld (ISO) 33          |                                    27 | n = 14                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 6 (0.9)          | 6.5 (0.9)         |           0.48 |
| Schoenfeld (ISO) 33          |                                    27 | n = 14                                     | Lateral thigh (50%)                    | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.8 (0.9)        | 6.2 (0.9)         |           0.41 |
| Schoenfeld (SHORT) 9         |                                    23 | n = 12                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.25 (0.53)      | 5.61 (0.56)       |           0.36 |
| Schoenfeld (SHORT) 9         |                                    23 | n = 12                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 3.59 (0.43)      | 3.95 (0.46)       |           0.36 |
| Schoenfeld (LONG) 9          |                                    23 | n = 11                                     | Anterior thigh (50%)                   | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.35 (0.65)      | 6.06 (0.58)       |           0.71 |
| Schoenfeld (LONG) 9          |                                    23 | n = 11                                     | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 3.58 (0.58)      | 3.99 (0.65)       |           0.41 |
| Schoenfeld (LL) 34           |                                    18 | n = 9                                      | Quadriceps femoris (50%)               | 8            | 27 sets First 6 weeks: 16- 24 sets Last 2 weeks: 12- 18 sets                                                                                                            | 5.46 (1.09)      | 5.98 (0.92)       |           0.52 |
| Schoenfeld (HL) 34           |                                    18 | n = 9                                      | Quadriceps femoris (50%)               | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.71 (0.42)      | 6.23 (0.52)       |           0.52 |
| Schwanbeck (free- weight) 35 |                                    36 | n = 18                                     | Quadriceps                             | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.6 (0.7)        | 5.9 (0.7)         |            0.3 |
| Schwanbeck (machine) 35      |                                    36 | n = 18                                     | Quadriceps                             | 8            |                                                                                                                                                                         | 5.9 (0.5)        | 6.2 (0.5)         |            0.3 |
| Wilson (placebo) 17          |                                    20 | n = 9                                      | Quadriceps femoris                     | 12           | Phase 1 = 13 sets Phase 2 = 12 sets Phase 3 = 8-13 sets                                                                                                                 | 5.02 (0.21)      | 52.6 (0.21)       |           0.24 |
| Wilson (HMB) 17              |                                    20 | n = 11                                     | Quadriceps femoris                     | 12           | Phase 1 = 13 sets Phase 2 = 12 sets Phase 3 = 8-13 sets                                                                                                                 | 5.02 (0.21)      | 57.4 (0.21)       |           0.72 |
| Zaroni (SPLIT) 36            |                                    18 | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 |              | 15 sets                                                                                                                                                                 | 4.55 (0.33)      | 4.79 (0.28)       |           0.24 |
| Zaroni (TOTAL) 36            |                                    18 | n = 9                                      | Vastus lateralis (50%)                 | 8 8          |                                                                                                                                                                         | 4.76 (0.43)      | 5.22 (0.32)       |           0.46 |

Table 3 Legend:

G5: 5 set group; G10: 10 set group; G15: 15 set group; G20: 20 set group; EXP: Experimental group; CON: Control group; G16: 16 set group; G24: 24 set group; G32: 32 set group; G1: 1 day per week group; G2: 2 days per week group; N-VAR: Non-varied exercise group; VAR: Varied exercise group; HF Group: Hip flexion training group; KE Group: Knee extension training group; PA: Phosphatidic acid + resistance training group; PL: Placebo + resistance training group; Whey+HMB: Whey + Hydroxymethylbutyrate group; Whey+leu: Whey + Leucine group; TOTAL: Total body routine group; SPLIT: Split routine group; VOL: High volume group: INT: High intensity group; DAA: D-aspartic acid group; FAST: Fast repetition tempo group; SLOW: Slow repetition tempo group; TRAD: Passive interset rest group; ISO: No-load isometric contractions interset rest group; SHORT: Short-interset rest interval group; LONG: Long-interset rest interval group; LL: Low load group; HL: High load group