<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Central and Peripheral  Fatigue During Resistance Exercise A Critical Review

## by Adam Zaj ą c 1 , Ma ł gorzata Chalimoniuk 2 , Adam Maszczyk 1 , Artur Go ł a ś 1 Józef Lngfort 1

## ,

Resistance  exercise  is  a  popular  form  of  conditioning  for  numerous  sport  disciplines,  and  recently  different modes of strength training are being evaluated for health benefits. Resistance exercise differs significantly in nature, and several variables determine the direction and range of adaptive changes that occur in the muscular and skeletal system of the body. Some modes of resistance training can also be effective in stimulating the cardiovascular system. These variables include exercise selection (general, specific, single or multi joint, dynamic, explosive), type of resistance (free weights, variable resistance, isokinetics), order of exercise (upper and lower body or push and pull exercises), and most of all the training load which includes intensity expressed as % of 1RM, number of repetitions, number of sets and the rest interval between sets.  Manipulating these variables allows for specific adaptive changes which may include gains in muscle mass, muscle strength or muscle endurance. It has been well established that during resistance exercise fatigue occurs, regardless of the volume and intensity of work applied. The peripheral mechanisms of fatigue have been studied and explained in more detail than those related to the CNS. This review is an attempt to bring together the latest knowledge regarding fatigue, both peripheral and central, during resistance exercise. The authors of this review concentrated  on  physiological  and  biochemical  mechanisms  underlying  fatigue  in  exercises  performed  with  maximal intensity, as well as those performed to exhaustion with numerous repetitions and submaximal load.

Key words : resistance exercise, muscle contraction, metabolites, excitability, fatigue.

## Introduction

Resistance exercise that requires both shortening (concentric) and lengthening (eccentric) contractions is a mode  of  training commonly  accepted  as  an  integral  part  in  the athletes  training  regimen.  The  major  objective  of resistance exercise is the stimulation of structural and  functional  adaptation  in  the  organism  to improve performance in a sport specific physical task and/or induce health-related benefits. In case of athletes, to achieve  this target, a carefully planned  training  program  must  be  applied  that focuses on appropriate frequency, length (volume)  and  intensity  of  work,  and  includes optimal rest intervals. Effectiveness of mechanical stimuli on muscle tissue also depends on type of contractions i.e.  lengthening  contractions  have shown a more powerful stimulus for neuromuscular adaptation compared to shortening ones (Adams et al. 2004, Hortobagyi et al.  1996,  Zebrowska  et  al.  2013b).  Application  of these factors varies depending on a given individual's state of performance and fitness. It is well established that an efficient training program should be based on the so called overload principle which is defined as the workload demand on the body greater than that to which it is accustomed (Bompa 2005). This principle commonly  accomplished  by  coaches  inevitably leads to frequently experienced by athletes, acute post exercise fatigue (Fry et al. 1991, Borresen and Lambert,  2009,  Bangsbo  et  al.  2013).  Adaptive changes in response to exercise occur only during rest,  thus  improper  post  exercise  recovery  may cause  residual  fatigue  (Borresen  and  Lambert, 2009),  and  as  a  consequence  the  athlete  may  not reach  the  supercompensation  phase  (Zatsiorsky and  Kraemer  2006).    Systemic  residual  fatigue carries  on  to  overtraining,  defined  as  a  state  of overstress  or  failure  to  adapt  to  an  exercise  load and/or to a drop in performance level. In extreme cases,  when  not  compensated  it  leads  to  the overtraining syndrome (Johnson and Thiese 1992, Kreher and Schwartz 2012). The overtraining syndrome  is  expressed  in  the  inability  to  train hard, and occurs in two clinical forms: sympathetic  and  parasympathetic  and  generally their  appearance  are  strongly  depended  on  the type and mode of exercise applied. Both forms of fatigue may involve central, e.g. CNS, (Gandevia 2001) and/or peripheral sites (Enika and Duchateau 2008). Studies indicate that peripheral fatigue  appears  when depletion of energy stores occurs, accumulation of by-products or impairment  of  muscle  contractile  mechanism  is attained  in  response  to  exercise,  and  recently  its relation to an immunological and genetic response is suggested (Poole et al. 2008, Jones et al. 2008, Vanhatalo  et al. 2010, Keyser 2010, Finsterer 2012). Changes in performance in relation  to  the  above  mentioned  factors  were carefully  investigated  in  humans  in  response  to different  types  of  exercise,  yet  they  can't  fully explain fatigue symptoms appearing during endurance  exercise  (Bigland-Richte  et  al.  1986, Cooper et al.1988, Noakes, 2012). Thus, declines in performance during exercise are also attributed to CNS,  which  integrates  input  from  various  body parts and is known as a central fatigue. In case of resistance training, central fatigue is poorly investigated and recognized.

1 -Department of Sports Theory, The Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education, Katowice, Poland.

2 -The Department of Tourism and Health in Bia ł a Podlaska, Józef Pi ł sudski University of Physical Education in Warsaw, Poland.

## Resistance exercise and local fatigue

In general, desired adaptation in response to  strength  training  can  be  induced  by  specific type  of  loading.  Mostly  two  types  of  loading  in strength training protocols are used, e.g. hypertrophic loading, and the so called maximal strength  training.  In  both  cases  the  amount  of work  performed,  and  especially  the  intensity  of work with a proper recovery phase play a crucial role in generating muscle growth (Werborn et al. 2007). Evidence presented in the literature highlights that both types of loading cause similar post-exercise intramuscular perturbations, e.g. decrease in intramuscular glycogen, phosphocreatine,  ATP  stores  and  an  increase  in inorganic phosphate and hydrogen ions (Dawson et.al. 1978, Hivonnen  et al.1987, Green 1997, Westerblad et al. 2002, Takada et al. 2012). These changes are especially evident when  exercise intensity  during  training  sessions  reach  or  are close to one repetition maximum (1RM) (Tesch eta al. 1986). This leads to muscle fatigue, and in turn to a reduction of skeletal muscle function. There is now  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  common physiological mechanism that may be involved in eliciting  muscle  fatigue  and  pain  (Burnes  at  al. 2008). Nociceptive afferent input may be involved in  the  modulation  of  central  motor  drive  during exercise, and impaired motor function to prevent the  development  of  fatigue  (Amann  et  al.  2009). There are a few well recognized activating factors at  the  cellular  level  for  group  III  and  IV  muscle afferents: ATP, inorganic phosphate and H+ ions (Allen et al. 2008). Release of ATP usually occurs in  patients  with  muscle  damage  due  to  trauma (Mense 2008).  It is known that resistance exercise also induces muscle  damage  as  indicated  by muscle micro injures (Ribeiro 2008), and increased serum  CK  activity  (Nosaka  and  Clarkson  1992, Rodriguez  2010,  Jackman  et  al.  2010).  Elevated plasma CK activity has been proposed as one of the  best  indirect  indicator  of  muscle  damage, especially in the case of resistance exercise (Koch et  al.  2014).  Some  studies  indicate  an  association between serum CK  level, and both strength impairment  and  reduced  ATP  production  after resistance exercise (Brancaccio et al. 2007, Brancaccio et al. 2010, Sorichter et al. 1999).  This type of exercise habitually performed in ischemic conditions  simultaneously  causes  a  fall  in  pH (Webster  et  al. 1993, Westerblad  et  al.  2002). Metabolic  and  chemical  perturbations  in  skeletal muscle  were  also  linked  with  transient  fatigue after  intermittent-sprint  exercise  performed  with maximal  intensity  (Bangsbo  et  al.2006,  Kayser 2010).  Evidence  presented  in  human  and  animal studies highlight the connection between changes in  metabolic  products  of  muscular  contraction and  CNS  function,  by  stimulation  of  III  and  IV

muscle  afferents.    Myelinated  group  III  afferents are  more  mechanosensitive,  and  are  stimulated preferentially in response to muscle force production (Rotto and Kaufman 1988, Hayes et al. 2009). Unmyelinated group IV afferents are primarily metabosensitive, as compared to group III (Haouzi et al. 1999). In regards to recent animal studies  two  different  subtype  of  chemosensitive group III and IV muscle afferents were distinguished: metaboreceptors (ergoreceptors) and metabo-nociceptors, but its mutual participation  in  stimulating  supraspinal  areas  is not  known  (Jankowski  et  al.  2013,  Amann  et  al. 2015). During muscle contractions both groups of afferents transmit information to the brainstem to adjust cardiorespiratory activity by increased sympathetic nerve activity (Murphy at al. 2011). It is not known  how  this mechanism  operates during  resistance  exercise,  despite  the  fact  that dramatic  increases  in  both  blood  pressure  (BP) and heart rate in response to this type of exercise have  been  observed  for  years  (Niewiadomski  et al. 2008, Sale et al. 1993, Scharf et al. 1994, Zebrowska et al. 2013a). The rise in BP may be at least  partially  explained  by  compression  of  the vasculature from intracellular forces generated by muscles  during  static exercise (Lydakis  et al. 2008). Moreover, it was shown that during exhaustive contraction activation of group III and IV muscle afferents affect the regulation  of motor unit  recruitment    by  operating  at  spinal  and supraspinal  levels    (Gandevia    2001,  Decherchi and Dousset 2003), and participate in motor command  adjustment  (Amman  and  Dempsey 2008, Wang et al. 2010). It is not fully recognized which  of  these  nerve  fibers  are  mainly  activated during resistance exercise. With regard to exhaustive contraction, activation of muscle afferents should especially occur during resistance exercise performed with intensity close to  1RM  to  prevent  the  magnitude  of  muscle fatigue  and  the  danger  of  injuries  (Taylor  et  al. 2000). It is known  that recruitment of muscle fiber types depend on the intensity of exercise performed,  and type I fibers are recruited when exercise starts, whereas type II fibers are activated when  exercise  intensity  increases  (Merletti  et  al. 1990).  The  consequences  of  such  a  recruitment pattern during exercise performed with intensity close to 1RM is that recruitment of both the type I and II motor units occurs. Because type I muscle fibers are O2-dependent, resistance exercise performed with intensity close to 1RM may cause a  transient  local  hypoxic  condition.  This  may suggest that peripherally-induced factors in response to resistance exercise should be primarily  involved  in  activation  of  type  III/IV muscle  afferents  within  type  I  muscle  fibers.  In line with such an assumption, type I muscle fibers are always initially recruited during exercise (Sale 1987).  On  the  other  hand    type  II  fibers  achieve recruitment during high intensity fatiguing exercise and therefore it is suggested that a high share of II muscle fibers are recruited to perform resistance  exercise  with  intensity  close  to  1RM (Komi  and  Tesch  1979).  Following  this  notion, during brief maximal exercise, a greater metabolic stress indicated by reduction in ATP was demonstrated in human type II fibers in comparison  to  I  type  (Karatzaferi  at  al.  2001). Similarly,  the  decrease  of  ATP  content  during recovery was still lower in type II fibers than type I  (Karatzaferi  et  al.  2001a).  It  is  clear  that  an increase in lactate production mirrors recruitment and  activity  of  type  II  muscle  fibers,  and  this process  starts  at  exercise  intensity  reaching  the anaerobic threshold (Peinado et al. 2014). Accordingly,  a  high  level  of  blood  lactate  levels was seen, after both unilateral and bilateral resistance  exercise  in  young  man  with  at  least  6 month  strength  training  experience  (Costa  et  al. 2015). Thus, a sudden increased acidosis in type II fibers, and a high rate of phosphocreatine hydrolysis accompanied by concomitant inorganic phosphate accumulation during resistance exercise  may  be  considered  as  a  predominant factor stimulating type III/IV afferents.  Some authors indicate that peripheral fatigue manifesting itself as a muscle locomotor impairment  is  very  sensitive  for  hypoxemia  and hypoxia  conditions  (Romer  et  al.  2006,  Romer  et al. 2007). This leads to the assumption that diminished  oxygen delivery during resistance exercise, which has a considerable isometric component is a substantial factor affecting intramuscular metabolic perturbations. However, a recent study concerning handgrip exercise with blood  flow  occlusion  provides  evidence  that  the magnitude of fatigue development is not constant for small muscle mass exercise across O2 delivery conditions (Broxterman et al. 2015). In addition to this, recent studies with the utilization of nuclear magnetic resonance showed that blood flow restricted and traditional resistance training performed to fatigue produced equal muscle hypertrophy  (Farup  et  al.  2015).  Currently,  it  is not  fully  recognized  which  of  group  III  and  IV muscle afferents are mainly activated during resistance  exercise  and  this  issue  needs  to  be further  investigated.  A  role  of  group  III  and  IV muscle afferents on central motor drive has been lately reviewed by Laurin et al. (2015).

## Central fatigue and resistance exercise

Limitations to strength are both neuromuscular  and  muscular  in  nature  (Scale 1998). Participation of CNS in strength generation is indirectly demonstrated by adaptation to resistance training seen without  increasing in muscle girth during the initial weeks of strength training (McArdle et al. 2009). Research indicates that  both  central  and  peripheral  fatigue  expand more  slowly during submaximal  exercises in comparison  to  maximal  voluntary  contractions (Taylor  and  Gandevia  2008).  Among  potential mediators  of  CNS  related  fatigue,  depletion  of acetylcholine  in  the  motor  end  plate  may  play  a negligible role because neuronal impulses are not blocked during muscle fatigue at the neuromuscular junction structure, and acetylcholine  is  not  fully  depleted  (Fitts  1994, Baker et al. 1993). This leads to the conclusion that motor  neuron  drive  during  resistance  exercise must  be  regulated  by  higher  structures  in  the central nervous system, and  feedback signals from the muscle. The locomotor system is organized by neuronal networks of central pattern generators (CPGs)  located in the spinal cord responsible for producing  the basic rhythmic patterns (Guertin 2012). Higher-level centers (the prefrontal cortex, the motor cortex, basal ganglia and cerebellum) are responsible for the initiation of  movement  and  modulation  of  its  patterns  to environmental  conditions  by  changing  its  speed and direction  (Grillner,  1997).  The  importance  of all these brain regions for the generation of voluntary rhythmic motor patterns was documented  by  functional  magnetic  resonance imaging  in  humans  (Jahn et al. 2004, 2008). Locomotor  movements  may  also  be  shaped  by nitric  oxide  (NO)  acting  as  a  meta-modulator  by affecting other neuromodulators / neurotransmitters of monoaminergic brain system

(McLean and Sillar, 2004, Chalimoniuk et al. 2005, Goekint et al. 2012), and recently the alternations in  the  nitric  oxide/soluble  guanylyl  cyclase/cyclic guanosine 3',5'monophosphate pathway in motor  control-related  subcortical  brain  regions were  suggested  to  take  part  in  regulation  of locomotor activity after endurance training (Chalimoniuk  et  al.  2015).  In  agreement  with  a possible involvement  of  resistance exercise in modulation of NO-dependent pathways are data showing participation of NO/cGMP/KATP pathway in ant nociception in rats. In this study increasing  nitrite  levels  was  seen  both  in  plasma and CNS in resistance  exercised  rats  (Galdino  et al.  2015).  Among  CNS  monoamines  especially serotonin (5-HT), dopamine (DA) and noradrenaline (NA) have been merged with central  fatigue  by  investigating  micro  dialysis probe  from  brain  areas  involved  in  control  of locomotion (Meeusen 2005, Meeusen et al. 2007). Changes in 5-HT, as proposed by Newsholme et al. (1991) modulates neurotransmission and numerous physiological functions leading to central fatigue and attenuating exercise performance (Meeusen et al. 2006). This hypothesis assumes that elevation of plasma free fatty acids (FFA) and/or increase in muscle uptake and  metabolism  of  branched-chain  amino  acids (BCAA)  during  exercise  augments  the  ratio  of unbound  tryptophan.  The  increased  amount  of tryptophan  facilitates its  crossing  through  the blood-brain barrier, and therefore leading to higher 5-HT concentration within the brain potentially  affecting  performance.  Referring  to this hypothesis drawn  out  from  the data of exhausting endurance exercise to resistance exercise,  it's  worth  indicating,  that  this  type  of exercise  does  not  significantly  affect  plasma  FFA concentration (Goto et al. 2007, Rezaee et al. 2014), but  may  increase  the  rate  of  BCAA  metabolism, and thus reducing its plasma concentration (Shimomura  et  al.  2009).    Therefore,  it  can  be postulated  that  during  resistance  exercise  a  shift in plasma  BCAA concentration may be an important factor affecting central fatigue.  On  the other hand, nutritional strategy with  BCAA supplementation  have  been  shown  to  improve muscle  repair  after  resistance  exercise-induced muscle damage (Shimomura et al. 2009, da Luz et al. 2011), and considerably reduce muscle soreness (Jackman et al. 2010). Therefore, it can be speculated that BCAA-induced reduction in muscle damage  after resistance exercise  may attenuate the involvement of group III/IV afferents  in  the  development  of  central  fatigue. However,  their  inhibitory  effect  on  the  output from  spinal  motoneurons  (Amman  et  al.  2008, Amman  et  al.  2009)  during  resistance  exercise needs  to  be  investigated.  It  seems  likely  that  a possible  BCAA  protective  effect  against  muscle damage differs in the so called high and normal responders (Machado and Willardson 2010). One can  speculate  that  it  can  happen  at  the  skeletal microRNA level because high responders demonstrate different regulation of selected miRNA expression in comparison to low responders (Davidsen et al. 2011). The tryptophan-serotonin  theory  has  been  expanded from data obtained in animal studies by indication  that  5-HT  release  and  reuptake  can affect central fatigue (Bequet et al. 2002). Moreover,  some  authors  introduced  the  concept of the ratio of 5-HT to DA, and other neurotransmitters as more closely related variables with central fatigue (Meeusen et al. 2006, Meeusen and Watson 2007). Upregulation of DA in  the  brain  has  been  linked  to  exercise-induced elevation of blood calcium and its enlarged influx into CNS (Sutoo and Akiyama 2003). The responsible  mechanisms  for  a  rise  in  brain  DA after  endurance  training  has  been  attributed  to both calcium/calmodulin-dependent DA synthesis and increased DA receptor affinity to DA (McRae et  al.  1987,  Sutto  and  Akiyama  2003).  In  this regard,  there  is  a  lack  of  cross  sectional  studies focused  on  resistance  exercise.  In  spite  of  all, plasma  level  of  calcium  after  resistance  exercise was shown to reveal a biphasic pattern; lowering of  calcium  occurred  during  the  first  two  hours after cessation of resistance exercise, and  a significant  elevation  from  the  second  hour  was recorded  for  a  further  two  hours  in  sedentary subjects  (Ashinzawa  et  al.  1997).  In  this  study, during the entire examined period after cessation of resistance exercise,  hypercalciuria  appeared accompanied by acidosis (Ashinzawa et al. 1997), and the latter is known to stimulate the efflux of calcium  from  the  bone  (Bushinsky  et  al.  1983, Gren  and  Kleeman  1991).  Hydroxylation  of  DA leads to NA synthesis. The noradrenergic neurons innervate the whole  cerebral cortex, different subcortical  areas,  cerebellum  and  the  brain  stem

(Bouret et al.  2005),  with  all  of  them  involved  in the regulation of movement. In case of NA, there are studies which attempted to investigate memory;  learning  and  cognitive  function  during exercise and elevation of NA within the CNS was shown  to  improve  the  aforementioned  functions (Dunn et al. 1996, Sarbadadhikari and Saha 2006, Ebrahimi et al. 2010). A significant role of DA and NA in control of performance was also documented during exercise in the heat (Meeusen et  al.  2006).  There  is  a  lack  of  direct  studies  on central  fatigue  in  response  to  resistance  exercise. However, a recent study performed by means of Heart Rate Variability analysis indirectly indicates a pronounced activation of the autonomic nervous  system  after  high-intensity  body  weight

resistance exercise (Brian 2015).

Research investigating brain activity related to central fatigue shows that neurotransmission can be influenced by byproducts  of  muscle  metabolism  and  the  effect  of ammonia has been mostly explored. Under normal physiological conditions ammonia predominately appears in blood as the metabolic end product from gut and in a smaller extent by the  gastrointestinal  tract  (Romero-Gomez  et  al. 2009). Skeletal muscle has got a large capacity for ammonia production, what is usually revealed by its high blood accumulation during exercise above 60 VO2max (Buono et al. 1984). Diet manipulation is another potent factor that may increase ammonia  production  during  exercise  of  equal intensity,  and  it  can  entail  dissociation  between lactate and ammonia thresholds in healthy young men, commonly applied indicators for control of the training process (Czarnowski  et al. 1995, Langfort et al. 2004). Rapid adenosine triphosphate hydrolysis during high intensity exercise  builds  up  adenosine  di-phosphate  and adenosine monophosphate (AMP). In the further metabolic  degeneration  cascade  known  as  the purine nucleotide cycle, AMP is deaminated into inosinomono-phosphate, with the parallel formation  of  ammonia  (NH3).  Because  ammonia is correlated with  the  number  of  fast  switch muscle fibers, an increase in lactate and efficacy of oxidative metabolism (Meyer et al. 1980, Jansson et al. 1987, Dudley and Terjung 1985, Wilkinson et al.  2010),  and  all  these  factors  are  linked  with resistance exercise, this may suggest that ammonia might be an important player in modulation  of  central  fatigue  during  resistance exercise. Such an effect was  previously seen during prolonged exercise in humans and it was postulated that ammonia provoked central fatigue by affecting neurotransmitter metabolism (Nybol et al. 2005). There is a consensus that the impact of hiperammonemia  on  brain  function  can  be  seen when elevated systemic ammonia level sets up to 200 mol  x  l-1  (Banister  and  Cameron  1990, Brouns  et  al.  1990,  Nybo  et  al.  2005,  Mohr  et al.2006). However, there is no research in this area in  case  of  resistance  exercise.  The  available  data from  prolonged  endurance  exercise  and  patients with liver disease may lead to the conclusion that induced in response to intense resistance exercise hiperammonemia does not have deteriorations in brain function. This is because the first symptoms of  deterioration  of  CNS  functions  emerge  with  a delay of a few  hours  (~2 hrs) after eliciting hiperammonemia.  Secondly,  a  higher  uptake  of ammonia  by  CNS  may  be  'buffered'  by  the protective role of astrocytes. The above mentioned  issues  and  ammonia  metabolism  in relation to brain and fatigue have been excellently reviewed  and discussed by Wilkinson et al. (2010) despite the fact that the authors did not pay any attention to sweat ammonia  excretion  during exercise (Czarnowski and Górski 1991, Czarnowski et al. 1992).

## References

- Adams  GR,  Cheng  DC,  Haddad  F  Baldwin  KM.  Skeletal  muscle  hypertrophy  in  response  to  isometric, lengthening, and shortening training bouts of equivalent duration. J Appl Physiol, 2004; 96: 1613-1618.
- Allen DG, Lamb GD, H. Westerblad H. Impaired calcium release during fatigue. J  Appl Physiol ,  2008; 104: 296-305.
- Amman M, Proctor LT, Eldridge MW, Sebranek JJ, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA. Somatosensory feedback from the limbs exerts inhibitory influences on central neural drive during whole body endurance exercise. J Appl Physiol , 2008; 105: 1714-1724.
- Amann M, Proctor  LT,  Sebranek  JJ,  Pegelow  DF,  Dempsey  JA.  Opioid-mediated  muscle  afferents  inhibit central motor drive and limit peripheral muscle fatigue development in humans. J Physiol , 2009; 587: 271-283.
- Amann M, Sidhu SK, Weavil JC, Mangum TS, Venturelli M. Autonomic responses to exercise: Group III/IV muscle  afferents  and  fatigue.  Aut  Neurosci  Basic  Clin  2015,  188,  19  -Ahizawa  N,  Fujimura  R,

## Conclusions and perspectives

Recent  human  and  animal  experiments indicate that peripheral and central fatigue develops more slowly during submaximal exercise compared to maximal voluntary contractions  (Taylor  and  Gandevia  2008).  In  this context,  mechanisms  underlying  fatigue  during high intensity resistance exercises have been poorly investigated. This fully justifies the designing  of  well  controlled  resistance  exercise studies  to  reveal  possible  mechanisms  of  central fatigue using hypertrophy, maximal strength and power modes of exercise with both highly trained athletes  and  untrained  subjects,  to  additionally determine adaptive mechanisms. Additional experiments  can  be  carried  out  with  the  use  of state-of  the  art  technology,  including  magnetic resonance  imaging  and  spectroscopy  as  well  as positron-emission-tomography. The above mentioned  techniques  should  be  utilized  with supplements preventing or delaying central fatigue and those inducing it during high intensity resistance exercise. Another possible approach  to  explain  mechanisms  responsible  for central fatigue induced  by resistance exercise could be revealed in studies with pharmacological manipulation  of  monoamine  receptors.  At  the cellular level, a role in peripheral fatigue of some metabolites as prostaglandins, thromboxane, bradykinin and purinergic type 2X receptors (e.g. P2X  and  TPRv1)  as  well  as  ion  channels  (e.g. ASICs)  in  response  to  resistance  exercise  also needs to be investigated.

- Tokuyama  K,  Suzuki  M.  A  bout  of  resistance  exercise  increases  urinary  calcium  independently  of osteoclastic activation in man. J Appl Physiol , 1997; 83: 1159-1163.
- Bangsbo J,  Mohr M Krustrup P. Physical and metabolic demands of training and match-play in the elite football player. J Sports Sci , 2006; 24: 665-674.
- Brancaccio P, Lippi G, Maffuli N. Biochemical markers of muscular damage. Clin Chem Lab Med ,  2010; 48: 757-767.
- Banister  EW,  Cameron BJC. Exercise-induced hiperammonemia: peripheral and central effect. Int  J  Sports Med , 1990; 11: S129-S142.
- Bequet F, Gomez-Merino D, Berthelot M, Guezennec C. Evidance  that brain glucose availability influences exercise-enhanced extracellular 5-Ht level in hippocampus: a microdialysis study in exercising rats. Acta Physiol Scand , 2002;176: 65-69.
- Brancaccio P, Maffuli N, Limongelli FM. Creatine kinase monitoring in sport medicine. Br Med Bull , 2007; 8182: 209-230.
- Brian KM, John QC, Daniel BL, Gretchen OD, Michael ER, Kyle TJ, Price BM. Autonomic responces to and acute bout of high-intensity body weight resistance exercise vs. treadmill running. J Strength Cond Res , 2015; [Epub ahesd of print].
- Brouns  F,  Beckers  E,  Wangenmakers  A,  Saris  W.  Ammonia  accumulation  during  highly  intensive  longlasting cycling: individual observation. Int J Sports Med , 1990; 11: 78-84.
- Bompa TO. Periodization theory and methodology of training . Champaign, IL. Human Kinetics 2005.
- Borresen  J,  and  Lambert  MI.  The  quantification  of  training  load,  the  training  response  and  the  effect  on performance. Sports Med , 2009; 39: 779-795.
- Bouret S, Sara SJ. Network reset: A simplified overarching theory of locus coeruleus noradrenaline function. Trends Neurosci , 2005; 28: 574-582.
- Broxterman  RM,  Craig  JC,  Smith  JR,  Wilcox  SL,  Jia  C,  Warren  S,  Barstow  TJ.  Influence  of  blood  flow occlusion on the development of peripheral and central  fatigue during small muscle mass handgrip exercise. J Physiol , 2015; 593: 4043-4054.
- Buono MJ, Clancy TR, Cook JR. Blood lactate and ammonium ion accumulation during graded exercise in humans. J Appl Physiol , 1984; 57: 135-139.
- Burnes LA, Kolkerb SJ, Danielson JF, Walder RY, Sluka KA. Enhanced muscle fatigue occurs in male  but not female ASIC-/- mice. Am J Physiol Regyl Integr Comp Physiol , 2008; 294: 1347-1355.
- Bushinsky DA, Krieger NS, Geisser DI, Crossman EB, Coe FL. Efects of pH on bone calcium and proton fluxes in vitro. Am J Physiol Renal  Fluid Electrolyte Physiol , 1983; 245: 204 -209.
- Chalimoniuk  M,  Chrapusta  SJ,  Lukacova  N,  Chalimoniuk  M.  Endurance  training  upregulates  the  nitric oxide/soluble  guanylyl  cyclase/cyclic  guanosine  3',5'-  monophosphate  pathway  in  the  striatum, midbrain and cerebellum of male rats. Brain Res , 2015; 1619: 29-40.
- Chalimoniuk M, Wro ń ski Z, Gilewski K, Stolecka A, Langfort J. Does exercise training affect NO/GC/cGMP pathway in the brain? J Hum Kinet , 2005; 13: 27-40.
- Costa Ec, Moreira A, Cavalcani B, Krinski K, Acki MS. Effect of unilateral and bilateral resistance exercise on maximal voluntary strength, total volume of load lifted, and perceptual and metabolic responses. Biol Sport , 2015; 32: 35-40.
- Czarnowski D, Górski J. Sweat ammonia excretion during submaximal cycling exercise. J Appl Physiol , 1991; 70: 371-374.
- Czarnowski  D,  Górski  J,  Jo ź wiuk  J,  Boro ń -Kaczmarska  A.  Plasma  ammonia  is  the  principal  source  of ammonia in sweat. Eur J Physiol Occup Physiol , 1992; 65: 135-137.
- Czarnowski D, Langfort J, Pilis W, Górski J. Effect of a low-carbohydrate diet on plasma and sweat ammonia concentrations during prolonged nonexhausting exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol , 1995; 70: 70-74.

- da Luz CR, Nicastro H, Zanchi NE, Chaves DF, Lancha AH Jr. Potential therapeutic effects of branchedchain amino acids supplemenytation on resistance exercise-based muscle damage in humans. J Int Soc Sports Nutr , 2011; 8:23-27.
- Davidsen PK, Gallagher  IJ,  Hartman  JW,  Tarnopolsky  MA,  Dela  F,  Helge  JW,  Timmons  JA,  Phillips  SM. High responders to resistance exercise training demonstrate differential regulation of skeletal muscle microRNA expression. J Appl Physiol , 2011; 110: 309-317.
- Dawson  MJ,  Gadian  DG,  Wilkie  DR.  Muscle  fatigue  investigated  by  phosphorus  nuclear  magnetic resonance. Nature , 1978; 274: 861-866.
- Decherchi P, Dousset E. Role of metabosensitive  afferent fibers in neuromuscular adaptive mechanisms. Can J Neurol Sci , 2003; 30: 91-97.
- Dudley GA, Terjung RL. Influence of aerobic metabolism on IMP accumulation in fast-twich muscle. Am J Physiol , 1985; 248: 37-42.
- Dunn AL, Reigle TG, Youngstedt SD, Armstrong RB, Dishman RK. Brain norepinephrine and metabolites after treadmill training and wheel running inrats. Med Sci Sports Exerc , 1996; 28: 204-209.
- Ebrahimi S, Rasshidy-Pour A, Vafai AA, Akhavan MM. Central bata-adrenergic receptors play an important role in the enhancing effect of voluntary exercise on learning memory in rat. Behav Brain Res , 2010; 208: 189-193
- Enoca RM, Duchateau J. Muscle fatigue: what, why and how it influences muscle function. J  Physiol ,  2008; 586: 11-23.
- Farup  J, de Paoli F, Bjerg K, Riis S, Ringgard S, Vissing K. Blood flow restricted and traditional resistance training performed to fatigue produced equal muscle hypertrophy. Scand J Med Sci Sports , 2015; 25(6): 754-763.
- Finsterer J. Biomarkers of peripherial muscle fatigue during exercise. BMC Musculoskeletal Disord ,  2012; 13: 2018.
- Fry RW, Morton AR, Keast D. Overtraining in athletes. An update . Sports Med , 1991; 12: 32-65.
- Galdino  GS,  Xavier  CH,  Almeida  R,  Silva  G,  Fontes  MA,  Menezes  G,  Duarte  ID,  Perez  AC.  The  nitric oxide/cGMPKATP  pathway  mediates  systemic  and  central  antinocipation  induced  by  resistance exercise in rats. Int J Neurosci , 2015; 125: 765-763.
- Gandevia SC. Spinal and supraspinal  factors in human muscle fatigue. Physiol Rev , 2001;  81: 1725-1789.
- Green HJ. Mechanisms of muscle fatigue in intense exercise. J Sports Sci , 1997; 15: 247-258.
- Green J, Kleeman R. Role of bone in regulation of systemic acid-base balance. Kidney Int , 1991; 39: 9-26.
- Guertin  PA.  Central  pattern  generator  for  locomotion:  anatomical,  physiological  and  pathphysiological considerations. Front Neurol , 2013; 3: 1-15.
- Haouzi P, Hill JM, Lewis BK, Kaufman MP. Responces of group III and IV muscle afferents to distension of the peripheral vascular bed. J Appl Physiol , 1999; 87: 545-553.
- Hayes  SG,  McxCord  JL,  Koba  S  Kaufman  MP.  Gadolinium  inhibits  group  III  but  not  group  IV  muscle afferents responses to dynamic exercise J Physiol , 2009; 587: 873-882.
- Hivonen J, Rehunen S, Rusko H, Harkonen M, Breakdown of high-energy phosphate compouds and lactate accumulation during short supramaximal  exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol , 1987; 56: 253-259.
- Hortobagyi  T,  Hill  JP  Houmard  JA,  Fraser  DD,  Lambert  NJ,  Israel  RG.  Adaptive  response  to  muscle lengthening and shortening in humans. J Appl Physiol , 1996; 80: 765-772.
- Jackman SH, Witard OC, Jeukendrup AE, Tipton KD. Branched-chain amino acid ingestion can ameliorate soreness from eccentric exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc , 2010; 42: 962-970.
- Jankowski MP, Rau KK, Ekmann KM, Anderson  CE, Koerber HR. Comprehensive phenotyping of group III and IV muscle afferents in mouse J Neurophysiol , 2013; 109: 2374-23-81.
- Jansson E, Dudley GA, Norman B, Tesch PA. ATP and IMP in single human skeletal muscle fibres after high

- intensity exercise. Clin Physiol , 1987; 7: 337-345.
- Jones AM, Wilkerson DP, DiMenna FJ, Fulford J, Poole DC. Muscle metabolic responses to exercise above and below the 'critical power' assessed using 31P-MRS. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol , 2008; 294: 585- 593.
- Johnson MB, Thiese SM. A review of overtraining syndrome - recognizing the signs and symptoms. J Athl Train , 1992;  27: 352-354.
- Karatzaferi C, de Haan A, Ferguson RA, van Mechelen W, Sargent AJ. Phosphocreatine and ATP content in human single muscle fibres before and after maximum dynamic exercise. Pflugers Arch , 2001; 442: 467474.
- Karatzaferi C, de Haan A, van Mechelen W, Sargent AJ. Mmetabolism changes in single human fibers during brief maximal exercise. Exp Physiol , 2001; 86: 411-415.
- Koch AJ, Pereira R, Machado M. The creatine kinase response to resistance exercise. J Musculoskel Neuronal Interact , 2014; 14: 68-77.
- Komi PV, Tesch PA. EMG frequency spectrum, muscle structure, and fatigue during dynamic contraction in man. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol , 1979; 42: 41-50.
- Kreher JB, Schwartz JB. Overtraining syndrome: a practical guide. Sports Health , 2012; 4:  128-138.
- Keyser RE. Peripheral fatigue: high-energy phosphates and hydrogen ions. PM&amp;R , 2010; 2: 347-358.
- Langfort   J,  Czarnowski  D,  Zendzian-Piotrowska M, Zarzeczny R, Górski J. Short-term low carbohydrate diet dissociates lactate and ammonia thresholds in men. J Strength Cond Res , 2004; 18: 260-265.
- Laurin J, Pertici V, Dousset E, Marquwste T, Decherchi P. Group III and IV muscle afferents: role on central motor drive and clinical implications. Neurosciences , 2015; 290: 543-551.
- Lydakis C, Momen A, Blaha C, Gugoff S, Gray K, Herr M, Leuenberger UA, Sinoway LI. Changes of central haemodynamic  parameters  during  mental  stress  and  acute  bouts  of  static  and  dynamic  exercise. J Hum Hypertens , 2008; 22: 320-328.
- Machado M, Willardson JM. Short recovery augments magnitude of muscle damage in high responders. Med Sci Sports Exerc , 2010; 42: 1370-1374.
- Meeusen R, Watson P. Amino acid and the brain: do they play a role in 'central fatigue'? Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab , 2007; 17: 37-46.
- McRae  PG,  Spirduso  WW,  Walters  TJ,    Farrar  RP,  Wilcox  RE.  Endurance  training  effects  on  striatal  D2 dopamine receptor binding and striatal dopamine metabolites in presenescent older rats. Psychopharmacology (Berl) , 1987; 92: 236-240.
- Meeusen R, Watson P, Hasegawa H, Roelands B, Piacentini MF. Central fatigue: the serotonin hypothesis and beyond. Sports Med , 2006; 36: 881-909.
- Meeusen  R,  Watson  P,  Hasegawa  H,  Roelands  B,  Piacentini  MF.  Brain  neurotransmitters  in  fatigue  and overtraining. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab , 2007; 32: 857-864.
- Meyer RA, Dudley GA, Terjung RL. Ammonia and IMP in different skeletal muscle fibers after exercise in rats. J Appl Physiol , 1980; 49: 1037-1341.
- Mense S. Muscle pain: mechanisms and clinical significance. Dtsch Arztebl Int , 2008; 105: 214-219.
- Mohr  M,  Rasmussen  P,  Drust  B,  Nielsen  B,  Nybo  L.  Environmental  heat  stress,  hyperammonemia  and nucleotide metabolism during intermittent exercise . Eur J Appl Physiol , 2006; 97: 89 - 95.
- Murphy MN, MizunoM, Mitchell JH, Smith SA. Cardiovascular regulation by skeletal  muscle  reflexes  in health and disesase. Am J. Physiol Heart Circ Physsiol , 2011; 301: 1191-1204.
- Newsholme EA, Blomstrand E, Hassmen P, Ekblom B. Physical and mental fatigue: do changes in plasma amino acids play a role? Biochem Soc Trans , 1991; 19: 358-362.
- Niewiadomski  W,  Laskowska  D,  G ą siorowska  A,  Cybulski  G,  Strasz  A,  Langfort  J.  Determination  and prediction of One Repetition Maximum (1RM): Safety consideration. J Hum Kinet , 2008; 19: 109-120.

- Nosaka K, Clarkson PM. Relationship between post-exercise plasma CK elevation and muscle mass involved in the exercise. Int J Sports Med , 1992; 13: 471-475.
- Noakes TD. Fatigue is a brain-derived emotion that regulates the exercise behavior to ensure protection of whole body homeostasis. Front Physiol , 2012; 3: 1-13.
- Nybol L, Dalsgaard MK, Steensberg A, Moller K, Secher NS. Cerebral ammonia uptake and accumulating during prolonged exercise. J Physiol , 2005; 15: 285-290.
- Peinado AB, Rojo JJ, Calderon FJ, Maffulli N. Responses to increasing exercise upon reaching the anaerobic threshold, and their control by the central nervous system. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehab , 2014; 6: 17.
- Poole DC. Resolving the determinants of high-intensity exercise performance. Exp Physiol , 2008; 94: 197-198.
- Ribeiro V, Pereira R, Machado M. resistance-exercise induced microinjures do not depend on 1 or 3 minutes rest time interval between series. Int J Sports Sci , 2008; 13: 44-53.
- Rodriguez BM, Dantas E, deSalles BF, Miranda H, Koch AJ, WillardsonJM, Simao R. Creatine kinase and lactate  dehydrogenase  responses  after  upperbody  resistance  exercise  with  different  rest  intervals. J Strength Cond Res , 2010; 24: 1657-1662.
- Romer LM, Haverkamp HC, Amann M, Lowering AT, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA. Effect of acute severe hypoxia on peripherial fatigue and endurance capacity in healthy humans. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol , 2007; 292: R598-R606.
- Romer LM, Haverkamp HC, Lowering AT, Pegelow DF, Dempsey JA.  Effect of exercise-induced hypoxemia on quadriceps muscle fatigue in healthy on quadriceps muscle fatigue in healthy humans. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol , 2006; 290: 365-375.
- Romero-Gomez  M, Jover M, Galan JJ, Ruiz  A. Gut ammonia production and its modulation. Metab Brain Dis , 2009; 24: 147-157.
- Rotto DM, Kaufman MP. Effect of metabolic products of muscular contraction on discharge of group III and IV afferents. J Appl Physiol , 1988; 64: 2306-2313.
- Scale DG. Neural adaptations to resistance training. Med Sci Sports Exerc , 1998; 20(suppl): 35-145.
- Sale DG. Influence of exercise and training on motor unit activation. Exerc Sport Sci Rev , 1987; 15: 95-151.
- Sale DG, Moroz DE, McKelvie RS, MacDougall JD, McCartney N. Comparison of blood pressure response to isokinetic and weight-lifting exercise. J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol , 1993; 19: 60-74
- Sarbadadhikari  SN,  Saha  AK.  Moderate  exercise  and  chronic  stress  produce  counteractive  effects  on different  areas  of  the  brain  by  acting  through  various  neurotransmitter  receptor  subtypes:  A hypothesis. Theor Biol Med Model , 2006; 3: 1-18.
- Scharf  HP, Eckhardt R, Maurus M, Puhl W. Metabolic and hemodynamic changes during isokinetic muscle training. A controlled clinical trial. Int J Spots Med , 1994; 15: 56-59.
- Shimomura Y, Kobayashi H, Mawatari K, Akita K, Inagurma A, Watanabe S., Bajotto G, Sato J. Effects of squat exercise and  branched-chain  amino  acid supplementation  on  plasma  free amino  acid concentration in young women. J Nutr Sci Vitaminal (Tokyo) , 2009; 55: 288-291.
- Sorichter  S,  Puschendorf  B,  Mair  J.  Sceletal  muscle  injury  induced  by  eccentric  muscle  action:  muscle proteins as markers of muscle fiber injury. Exerc Immunol Rev , 1999; 5: 5-21.
- Sutoo D, Akiyama K. Regulation of brain function by exercise. Neurobiol Dis , 2003; 13: 1-14.
- Takada  S,  Okita  K,  Suga  T,  Omokawa  M,  Kadoguchi  T,  Sato  T,  Takahashi  M,  Yokota  T,  Hirabayashi  K, Morita N, Horiuchi M, Kinugawa S, Tsutsui H. Low-intensity exercise can increase muscle mass and strength proportionally to enhanced metabolic stress under ischemic conditions. J Appl Physiol ,  2012; 113: 199-205.
- Taylor JL, Gandevia SC. A comparison of central aspects of fatigue in submaximal and maximal voluntary contraction. J Appl Physiol , 2008; 104: 542-550.
- Taylor JL, Petersen N, Butler JE, Gandevia SC. Ischemia after exercise does not reduce responses of human

motoneurons to cortical and corticospinal tract stimulation. J Appl Physiol , 2000; 525: 793-801.

- Tesch PA, Colliander EB, Kaiser P. Muscle metabolism during intense, heavy-resistance exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol , 1986; 55: 362-366.
- Vanhatalo A, Fulford J, DiMenna FJ, Jones AM. Influence of hyperoxia on muscle metabolic responses and the  power-duration  work  relationship  during  severe-intensity  exercise  in  humans:  a  31Pmagnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Exp Physiol , 2010; 95: 528-540.
- Webster MJ, Webster MN, Crawford RE, Gladden LB. Effect of sodium bicarbonate ingestion on exhaustive resistance exercise performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc , 1993, 25: 960-965.
- Werborn M, Augustsson J, Thorner R. The influence of  frequency, intensity, volume and mode of strength traning  on whole muscle cross-sectional area in humans. Sports Med ,  2007; 37: 225-264.
- Zatsiorsky VM, Kraemer WJ. Science and practice of strength trasining. 2 nd  ed . Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2006.
- Zebrowska A, Gasior Z, Jastrzebski D. Cardiovascular effects of the Valsalva Maneuver during static arm exercise in elite powerlifting athletes. Adv Exp Med Biol , 2013a; 755: 335-42.
- Zebrowska A, Waskiewicz Z, Zajac A. IGF-1 response to arm exercise with eccentric and concentric muscle contraction in resistance trained athletes. J Sports Med , 2013b; 34(2): 116-22

## Corresponding author:

## Adam Zaj ą c

Department of Sports Theory, The Jerzy Kukuczka Academy of Physical Education, Katowice, Poland

E-mail: a.zajac@awf.katowice.pl